Python Interactive Shell

- 01

Python is an interpreted language, which means it can execute code line by line. Executing code line by line is useful for learning Python and testing code concepts without having to compile and run a file.

When using the interpreter, the commands are executed and the results are displayed in the Python shell. The shell is also known as REPL. REPL (Read, Evaluate, Print, Loop) represents the process that the interpreter uses.

    R: Reads user input

    E: Evaluates the code

    P: Prints (displays) the output to the user

    L: Loops back to step read

The REPL process involves the following steps. Once you enter the interactive shell, you are presented with three chevrons (>>>), which means the shell is waiting for instructions. You then type a command and press <enter>. The computer will evaluate the command; if there is anything to display to the user, the computer will show it on the screen.

Since the computer executes code line by line, this is a great place to work out problems and explore ideas for your application.

- 02

Now that you understand what the Python shell is, let’s talk about how to use it.

To enter the Python shell, open a Linux or Windows terminal and type python at the prompt.
Note

Using the python command without a version number attached will open the default version on your system.

To use a specific version of Python, add the version number to the python command (python3.9). The command will open the Python shell and present you with three chevrons (>>>). The computer is now waiting for you to enter instructions.

You can now enter the instructions you want to execute. Looking at the example code, you will see a print("Hello World") statement was entered and evaluated and the results were displayed on the screen.

You will notice that a few variables and a print statement were entered. When the print statement executes, it gives an error. Looking at the error, you can see that this is a SyntaxError because ( ) was left off from around the z.

The Python shell allows you to do more than simple programming, you can also import modules and evaluate multiple lines of code using an if-else construct. Importing modules and if-else constructs will be talked about later.

Once you are finished and want to exit the Python shell, use the command exit(). The Python shell logs all your commands to a .python_history file that you can open with a text editor. This file is located at %USERPROFILE%/.python_history. This file allows you to review your commands and copy them if you need to.
